---
title:  "C4 Diagrams"
categories: what-is
layout: single

header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/what-is/floor-plans.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.6
excerpt: Software engineering is an interesting place. We have roles like Architect, and talk a lot about _architecture_ but rarely will you find any floor plans beyond initial scribbles on the back of a napkin. This is to be expected, documentation is hard to curate and harder to keep up to date, but in order to be able to provide a overview of a system they are crucial. C4 diagrams are a fantastic mechanism to provide that overview, and what's more, they're actually quite easy to create!
---

## Context, Containers, Components and Code

A C4 diagram is a visual tool to assist in understanding how a _some thing_ fits with other _things_ in its environment. There are **four** levels Context, Containers, Components, and Code, hence the name C4.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/what-is/c4-overview.jpg" alt="Demonstration of the different levels and how they interact." caption="Each level zooms into one of the parent blocks that we own to display additional detail." %}{: .img-zoom}

Each step down takes a single piece from the level above and examines what's going on inside it, the idea is that anyone that works with or in proximity to a system should find value in at least one part of the diagram. As per usual of course, this all makes a lot more sense with an example.

## A Unicorn Rental Agency

Let's say you have a herd of unicorns. People like unicorns, and as such would like to rent them for their parties, business events, or a random Tuesday for the fun of it. You started manually taking these orders over the phone, but they've surged in popularity and now you need a system to organise this for you.

What might that look like?

### Context

Before we can get too far into it, we need to understand some of the key building blocks of a C4 diagram. First we have users / other systems that interact with ours. The directionality of arrow indicates what is responsible for instantiating the action. Grey boxes are external systems, and blue are ones that we own.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/what-is/c4-unicorn-context.jpg" alt="Context diagram for a unicorn rentals agency." caption="The context level diagram is meant to indicate how a system fits with others around it." %}{: .img-zoom}

From this diagram we gain a general idea about what's going on. Users request a unicorn, some external system is responsible for taking the payment and the user is sent emails updating them on the state of their request. Nice! We get all that from a single diagram. We see that we don't own the email system, nor the payments, so no complexities for us around storing credit card information etc.

### Containers

Next is the containers. We have this Unicorn Rentals software system, but no real idea right now what it is capable of.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/what-is/c4-unicorn-container.jpg" alt="Container diagram for a unicorn rentals agency." caption="The container diagram displays the primary abstractions that make up the system." %}{: .img-zoom}

Right, okay. This diagram is telling us that there's only a few key blocks to this system. There's a web application that serves the Single Page Application, which is in turn responsible for talking to our API for all its needs.

Whats more however, is that not only can we can see _which_ blocks in our system are responsible for communicating with each other, but also with external services. The API isn't responsible for talking to Stripe, the SPA is, and likewise the SPA cannot send an email itself, that seems to be some side effect from communicating with the API.

I don't know about you, but that's a lot of information packed into a single diagram. From these two alone, you should have a reasonable overview as to how this system works. For the sake of argument, I've included a different architecture below. What does this one tell you in comparison to the first?

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/what-is/c3-unicorn-container-mvc.jpg" alt="Container diagram for a unicorn rentals agency." caption="Here we see there's no separation between the front-end and backend systems, they are one. We might make a guess here that this a Model View Controller pattern, where each view exists to serve each front-end page." %}{: .img-zoom}


### Components

For each block in the container section we'd expect to see a corresponding component.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/what-is/c4-unicorn-api-component.jpg" alt="Component diagram for a unicorn rentals agency API." caption="The component diagram helps us understand what the container is capable of, and what interacts with external services." %}{: .img-zoom}

The component diagram displays a lot more detail than the previous two. At this point the document is probably only of interest to engineers, providing a map for how various pieces speak to one another.

> It's interesting to note here that there's a Route Planning system in the API. Unicorns may be magical but they're still subject to traffic laws.


### Code

We'd now expect to see [UML diagrams](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unified_Modeling_Language) to explain how different code blocks interact. Generally these go into a little more detail than most require, and change too quickly for the diagrams to be accurate. As such they are not generally advised to do, and as such I won't be doing them here. (At this point though, you should get the idea.)

## Wow, that's a lot

C4 diagrams may seem like a lot of effort to understand, and in some ways that's true. What they really represent are *abstractions*, with each layer peering into a given block and seeing what's inside. The first two levels can provide an immense amount of value to anyone that is responsible for the development of a system but does not build it, while the third level can help provide a useful map for those that do.

The level you go to is up to you, and while each one requires more maintenance than the last this is really one of the key advantages. Agile methodologies promote iterating quickly, so large, detailed architecture diagrams can be cumbersome. Instead C4 allows you to supply just the level of detail that is *useful* without immediately being out of date!

## Further reading

* [https://c4model.com/](https://c4model.com/)
* [https://www.infoq.com/articles/C4-architecture-model/](https://www.infoq.com/articles/C4-architecture-model/)



<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/medium-zoom/dist/medium-zoom.min.js" type="application/javascript"></script>
<script>
  mediumZoom('figure.img-zoom img, .img-zoom img',  { scrollOffset: 0, background: '#212530' });
  document
    .querySelectorAll('figure.img-zoom figcaption')
    .forEach(
      function(element) {
        element.innerText += ' (Click to zoom.)';
      }
    );
</script>